Title: NGT Summons Delhi Government Official Over Action Plan On Climate Change
Updated: October 12, 2018 4:35 pm IST
Content:
Plea says Delhi generates 800 million tonnes of garbage daily and it is dumped as it is on landfill sites
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has summoned an official of the Environment Department in Delhi to explain the proposed amendments made by the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government in the State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC).
A bench headed by Raghuvendra S Rathore and expert member Satyawan Singh Garbyal directed the deputy secretary or concerned senior scientist of the department to appear before it on October 25.
"A draft Action Plan was prepared in the month of September in 2016. However, the Counsel for Delhi was unable to give any update in respect of the proposed amendments to be made in the Action Plan," said the bench.

"Therefore, in order to apprise us with the update which is proposed by the state government, we direct the Deputy Secretary/concerning senior scientist of the Environment Department of NCT Delhi to appear before the Tribunal on the next date of hearing with complete information and the proposed amendments in the said Action Plan of Climate Change, the one finalised so far," it added.
The order was passed after the environment department informed the tribunal that it has decided to make certain amendments to the SAPCC.
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change had earlier told the tribunal that it has repeatedly asked the Delhi Government to expedite and submit the SAPCC but nothing has been done.
The tribunal was hearing a petition by scientist Mahendra Pandey seeking direction to draft, finalise and implement the SAPCC on the lines and the spirit of the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).
The plea had also sought directions to Arvind Kejriwal government to place on record relevant material and documents relating to steps taken by it in order to implement Action Plan on Climate Change.
NAPCC is a comprehensive action plan which outlines measures on climate change related adaptation and mitigation while simultaneously advancing development.
The government of NCT of Delhi had earlier claimed that it formulated a Climate Change Agenda for the national capital in 2009.
PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com
However, the Agenda expired in 2012 and since then Delhi has no Action Plan on Climate Change, the plea alleged.
The plea said Delhi generated around 800 million tonnes of garbage daily and the same was dumped as it is on three main landfill sites of national capital which have completed their life.
